# EFB(tm) Cathode Regulator

## EFB(tm) - Enhanced Fixed Bias(tm)

This is a regulator circuit developed by David Gillespie for generating a fixed cathode bias in the
output stage of a tube power amplifier.  Unlike traditional cathode bias setups, which derive the
bias voltage from the current flowing through the output stage, this cathode regulator maintains
a fixed positive bias voltage on the output tube cathodes regardless of the current flowing through
the tubes.  This prevents an over-bias condition when the tubes are driven to full power, increasing
power output and reducing distortion.

In addition to maintaining a fixed bias voltage, the regulator is referenced to the output stage's
screen voltage (for pentode mode) or the plate voltage (for ultra-linear mode).  If the power supply
sags for some reason, the regulator compensates by reducing the bias applied to the cathodes,
thus maintaining the optimal operating point.  This flavor of EFB(tm) is best suited for smaller power
amplifiers, such as those based on the 6V6 or EL84/6BQ5.

The circuit is very simple.  It is comprised of an adjustable voltage divider and an LM337 negative
voltage regulator, along with some ancillary compomnents for stability and current sensing.   The
voltage regulator is made up of a large dropping resistor (330K 2W is a common value), a trim pot
(typically 10K), and a tail resistor valued to suit the desired voltage range.  The voltage divider takes
the reference voltage and outputs a voltage that is fed to the adjusment pin of the LM337, which is
stabilized by a 4.7µF capacitor.  The LM337 will output a voltage approximately 1.25V lower than the
adjustment pin voltage.  The output pin of the LM337 is connected to the cathodes of the output
stage through a 10R 1% 2W resistor used for current sensing, allowing easy measurement of
the total output stage quiescent current.  There is a 22µF capacitor connected to the LM337 output
pin to provide AC bypass of the output tube cathodes.The input pin of the LM337 is connected to
ground.  The total cathode current of the output stage flows through the LM337 to ground.

Because the LM337 input is connected to ground, the LM337 itself can be used to connect the
regulator board to the amplifier chassis.  The trim pot should be oriented so that bias can be
adjusted while the regulator board is mounted to the chassis.  The chassis sinks any heat
generated by the LM337.

I have spec'd the large voltage divider leg as 2W as a safety margin; a 1W resistor is probably
sufficient, but I personally prefer to use a 2W part there.  The trim pot and lower divider leg can
be 1/2W parts.  The current sensing resistor should be a 10R 2W 1% part for accuracy.  The
4.7µF and 22µF capacitors should be rated for 50V.  I prefer to use long-life Nichicon electrolytics
here.  If you want to skip the current sensing capability, you need to install a wire jumper in lieu
of the 10R resistor.  Any decent quality LM337 should work fine.  The TI and ST versions are great.
I have a bag of Fairchild parts that work perfectly well.

## Acknowledgements

EFB(tm) and Enhanced Fixed Bias(tm) are trademarks of D Gillespie Designs, and are used with
permission.  Circuit is copyright D Gillespie Designs, and is used with permission.

Please let me know if you find this useful.  And many thanks to David Gillespie for sharing this
circuit with the tube audio community.  Check out his work at [Tronola](http://www.tronola.com/html/dave_s_lab.html).
